Blog post for derived source feature (#3954)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-09-30-Introducing-Derived-Source.markdown

---
layout: post
title:  "Save up to 2x on storage with derived source"
authors:
   - tanikp
   - mgodwani
   - bukhtawa
   - kolchfa
date: 2025-09-30
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: todo
meta_description: "Learn about derived source, introduced in OpenSearch 3.2: why it matters, how it works, and how to start using it to reduce storage costs."
---

Storage is the key factor when deciding on the optimal configuration of OpenSearch cluster hence key factor in driving infrastructure cost of your OpenSearch cluster. As your data grows, storage requirement can increase in multifold factor, given how OpenSearch stores document in multiple formats. Derived source feature is here to optimise storage cost.

In this blog post, we will describe how documents are stored in OpenSearch and how to use derived source to retrieve those documents without compromising on most of the legacy functionality and with significant storage reduction.

## How documents are stored in OpenSearch?

> When documents are ingested, OpenSearch stores the original document body in the [`_source`](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/metadata-fields/source/) fields and also document’s fields get stored in various forms like [indexed](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/mapping-parameters/index-parameter/), [stored](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/mapping-parameters/store/) and [docValues](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/mapping-parameters/doc-values/). OpenSearch stores data in different format as each field type requires values to be stored in specific form for optimised search, e.g. full-text search relies on inverted index whereas exact term aggregation on keyword field relies on doc values. As original document gets stored in a separate data-structure comprising all the fields at a single place, it becomes easy to fetch while doing the query rather that fetching individual fields from the various disc locations. With this setup, search latency benefit is there at the expense of storage cost due to duplication of data.

Reviewer: > As original document gets stored in a separate data-structure comprising all the fields at a single place, it becomes easy to fetch while doing the query rather that fetching individual fields from the various disc locations. With this setup, search latency benefit is there at the expense of storage cost due to duplication of data.

These lines aren't easy to comprehend. Maybe try using an example query to demonstrate how different formats are retrieved with source getting used in the fetch phase only.

```json
PUT sample-index1
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "derived_source": {
        "enabled": true
      }
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    <index fields>
  }
}
```
## Performance benchmarks

Based on experiment runs, derived source provides the great storage reduction on some of the workloads. Search latency we have seen regression ranging from 10%(requesting 1k documents in terms aggregation) to 100%(requesting 10k documents in match-all query), wheres in some queries we have seen some latency improvements as well, considering the fact that decompression is not needed for most of the field types for which we are reading docValues as opposed to `_source` field, which is a stored field and requires decompression prior to reading it from the disc.

Workload | Storage Reduction
:--- | :---
nyc_taxis | 41% |
http logs | 43% |
elb logs | 58% |

> Across these benchmarks, we also saw significant reduction in merge time, ranging from 20% to 48%, likely due to smaller size shards requiring reduced time for copying the data in new merged segments. This also has direct impact on improvement of indexing throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across these benchmarks, we also saw significant indexing throughput improvements upto [X%] and also reduction in merge time, ranging from 20% to 48%, owing to lesser CPU overhead in generating optimised segments, which also helps cut down the merge overhead
```

Author: Updated the details

With reduced index size, other benefits can also be observed like smaller shard size leads to faster recovery in event on node restart or shard movement. Further smaller segments will require less disc I/O operations and less page cache swaps, leading to efficient queries.

While file based recovery can be fast, operational based recovery would take a hit due to regeneration of source. For operation based recovery, there are two types: 1) Lucene based, which would take a hit due to document replication using derived source and 2) Translog based, there is a way to read `_source` as it is instead of regenerating under derived source(which we have seen taking 2x more time, because of the way derived source works for documents in translog).

```json
PUT sample-index1
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "derived_source": {
        "enabled": true,
        "translog": {
          "enabled": false
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

> While derived source gives substantial storage reduction, there are certain limitations on the generated source in terms of, how it is displayed while querying for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While derived source offers substantial storage reduction, there are certain limitations on the generated source in terms of, how query responses are returned.
```

## How to configure derived source?

You can configure derived source at the index level. Because it changes the default behavior of storing the original `_source`, this setting can’t be updated after the index is created. This restriction prevents mixed behavior between the original stored source and the dynamically generated source (which can appear similar to the original source in output).

To configure derived source, set `derived_source.enabled` to `true` in the index settings:

```json
PUT sample-index1
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "derived_source": {
        "enabled": true
      }
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    <index fields>
  }
}
```

For more information, see [Derived source](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/metadata-fields/source/#derived-source).

## Performance benchmarks

> Based on experiment runs, derived source can provide significant storage reduction for certain workloads. Search latency showed a regression ranging from 10% (for 1k documents in a terms aggregation) to 100% (for 10k documents in a match-all query). In some queries, however, latency improved, since reading from `doc_values` often avoids the decompression required when accessing the stored `_source` field. The results are summarized in the following table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on experiment runs, derived source can provide significant storage reduction for certain workloads, shown in the following table.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Save up to 2x on storage with derived source"
authors:
   - tanikp
   - mgodwani
   - bukhtawa
   - kolchfa
date: 2025-09-30
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: todo
meta_description: "Learn about derived source, introduced in OpenSearch 3.2: why it matters, how it works, and how to start using it to reduce storage costs."
---

> Storage is a key factor driving infrastructure cost of your OpenSearch cluster. As your data grows, storage requirements can increase multifold, depending on whether OpenSearch stores documents in multiple formats. This is where derived source comes to the rescue, optimizing storage costs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Storage is a key factor driving the infrastructure cost of your OpenSearch cluster. As your data grows, storage requirements can increase multifold, depending on whether OpenSearch stores documents in multiple formats. This is where derived source comes to the rescue, optimizing storage costs.
```

![Doc-Field-Values](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-09-30-Introducing-Derived-Source/doc-field-values.png){:class="img-centered"}

OpenSearch stores data in different formats because each field type requires values to be stored in a specific form for optimized search. For example, full-text search relies on an inverted index, whereas exact term aggregations on keyword fields rely on doc values. Because the original document is stored in a separate data structure comprising all the fields at a single place, it becomes easy to retrieve in the fetch phase. This setup reduces search latency at the expense of storage costs because of data duplication.

> During an experiment conducted on a test dataset of roughly 1 billion documents stored in a single index, the field distribution was as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following image shows the field distribution during an experiment conducted on a test dataset of roughly 1 billion documents stored in a single index.
```

![Storage Breakdown](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-09-30-Introducing-Derived-Source/storage-distribution.png){:class="img-centered"}

## How does OpenSearch use the `_source` field?

> The `_source` field is not just used for document retrievals during search operations, but also for operations like updates, reindex operations, scripted updates, and recovery operations. If you disable `_source`, these operations become unavailable, which prevents data recovery and is therefore not recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `_source` field is not just used for document retrieval during search operations but also for operations like updates, reindex operations, scripted updates, and recovery operations. If you disable `_source`, these operations become unavailable, which prevents data recovery and is therefore not recommended.
```

> OpenSearch 2.9.0 introduced [ZSTD compression](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/im-plugin/index-codecs/), offering a high compression ratio at a fast compression speed. In the same experiment measuring storage footprint, enabling ZSTD compression reduced the stored field size to 216 GB---about a 46% reduction. However, even with this reduction, stored fields still occupy a significant amount of storage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenSearch 2.9.0 introduced [ZSTD compression](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/im-plugin/index-codecs/), offering a high compression ratio at a fast speed. In the same experiment measuring storage footprint, enabling ZSTD compression reduced the stored field size to 216 GB---about a 46% reduction. However, even with this reduction, stored fields still occupy a significant amount of storage.
```

## What is derived source?

> If your use case requires aggregations such as `min`, `max`, `avg`, `sum`, or `terms`, but not the matched documents themselves, storing the full data provides diminishing returns because the actual documents are unnecessary—the aggregations alone are sufficient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your use case requires aggregations such as `min`, `max`, `avg`, `sum`, or `terms` but not the matched documents themselves, storing all the data provides diminishing returns because the actual documents are unnecessary—the aggregations alone are sufficient.
```

> Starting with OpenSearch 3.2.0, you can use _derived source_ for such use cases to optimize the storage. Derived source mode modifies index behavior to exclude the `_source` field during ingestion, preventing data duplication and reducing storage requirements. These documents are retrieved dynamically using different forms of field storage (such as `doc_values` or stored fields) on demand. This approach preserves search functionality and supports operations that rely on `_source` data—such as reindexing, updates, scripted updates, and recovery, without actually storing the `_source` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with OpenSearch 3.2.0, you can use _derived source_ for such use cases to optimize storage. Derived source mode modifies index behavior to exclude the `_source` field during ingestion, preventing data duplication and reducing storage requirements. These documents are retrieved dynamically using different forms of field storage (such as `doc_values` or stored fields) on demand. This approach preserves search functionality and supports operations that rely on `_source` data—such as reindexing, updates, scripted updates, and recovery—without actually storing the `_source` field.
```

> With this modified document retrieval behavior, during the fetch phase of a search query, OpenSearch retrieves each field’s value using formats such as `doc_values` and stored fields, then combines the results to produce the final document, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this modified document retrieval behavior, during the fetch phase of a search query, OpenSearch retrieves each field's value using formats such as `doc_values` and stored fields, then combines the results to produce the final document, as shown in the following image.
```

![Derived_Source_Generation](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-09-30-Introducing-Derived-Source/derived-source-generation.png){:class="img-centered"}

> When configuring an index with derived source, OpenSearch validates that all fields are of supported types. When documents are accessed through operations such as search, update, or recovery, the derived source reconstructs each field’s value from either `doc_values` or stored fields as defined in the index mapping. Because this requires reading data from each field’s disk location rather than a single `_source` fetch, you may notice some latency degradation when retrieving large numbers of documents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When configuring an index with derived source, OpenSearch validates that all fields are of supported types. When documents are accessed through operations such as search, update, or recovery, the derived source reconstructs each field's value from either `doc_values` or stored fields as defined in the index mapping. Because this requires reading data from each field's disk location rather than a single `_source` fetch, you may notice some latency degradation when retrieving large numbers of documents.
```

> ## How to configure derived source?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How to configure derived source
```

> You can configure derived source at the index level. Because it changes the default behavior of storing the original `_source`, this setting can’t be updated after the index is created. This restriction prevents mixed behavior between the original stored source and the dynamically generated source (which can appear similar to the original source in output).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure derived source at the index level. Because it changes the default behavior of storing the original `_source`, this setting can't be updated after the index is created. This restriction prevents mixed behavior between the original stored source and the dynamically generated source (which can appear similar to the original source in output).
```

Workload | Storage reduction
:--- | :---
nyc_taxis | 41% |
http logs | 43% |
elb logs | 58% |

Search latency showed a regression ranging from 10% (for 1k documents in a terms aggregation) to 100% (for 10k documents in a match-all query). In some queries, however, latency improved, since reading from `doc_values` often avoids the decompression required when accessing the stored `_source` field. 

Across these benchmarks, we observed significant indexing throughput improvements of up to 18%, along with a reduction in merge time ranging from 20% to 48%. This is due to lower CPU overhead when generating optimized segments, which also helps reduce merge overhead.

With a reduced index size, additional benefits become apparent: smaller shards enable faster recovery during node restarts or shard relocations, and smaller segments require less disk I/O and fewer page cache swaps, resulting in more efficient queries.

While file-based recovery remains fast, operation-based recovery can be slower due to the need to regenerate the `_source`. There are two types of operation-based recovery: 

1. Lucene-based, which is impacted by document replication using derived source

> 2. Translog-based, in which reading the original `_source` instead of regenerating it can still take up to twice as long because of how derived source handles documents in the translog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Translog based, in which reading the original `_source` instead of regenerating it can still take up to twice as long because of how derived source handles documents in the translog.
```

```json
PUT sample-index1
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "derived_source": {
        "enabled": true,
        "translog": {
          "enabled": false
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

While derived source provides significant storage savings, it imposes certain limitations on how query responses are generated and returned.

### Date representation

For a [date](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/date/) field with multiple [formats](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/date/#formats) specified, derived source uses the first format from the list for all requested documents, regardless of the original ingested value.

### Geopoint representation

[Geopoint](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/geo-point/) field values can be ingested in multiple formats, but derived source always represents them in the fixed format `{"lat": lat_val, "lon": lon_val}`. Some precision loss may occur during indexing, and the same degree of precision loss may appear in derived source.

### Order and deduplication of multiple value fields

> Derived source automatically sorts and, for keyword fields, deduplicates values in multi-value arrays, as shown in the following example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Derived source automatically sorts and, for keyword fields, deduplicates values in multi-value arrays, as shown in the following example:
```

```json
1. Keyword field
    a. Ingested source
    {
      "keyword": ["b", "c", "a", "c"]
    }
    
    b. Derived source
    {
     "keyword": ["a", "b", "c"]
    }

2. Number field
    a. Ingested source
    {
      "number": [3, 1, 2, 1]
    }
    
    b. Derived source
    {
     "number": [1, 1, 2, 3]
    }
```

For field-level limitations, see the specific supported field documentation in [Supported fields](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/metadata-fields/source/#supported-fields-and-parameters).

## What's next?

> While derived source currently supports most commonly used field types, there are some limitations when defining these fields in index mappings. In the future, we plan to lift these limitations in order to open derived source for more use cases. Our development roadmap also includes expanding support to additional field types that aren't currently supported, such as [range](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/range/) and [geoshape](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/geo-shape/) fields. Beyond expanding functionality, we're focusing on performance optimizations to improve document retrieval strategies, which will reduce search latency when requesting large numbers of documents. These combined improvements will make derived source more flexible and performant across a broader range of scenarios.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While derived source currently supports most commonly used field types, there are some limitations when defining these fields in index mappings. In the future, we plan to remove these limitations in order to make derived source available for more use cases. Our development roadmap also includes expanding support to additional field types, such as [range](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/range/) and [geoshape](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/geo-shape/) fields. Beyond expanding functionality, we're focusing on performance optimizations to improve document retrieval strategies, which will reduce search latency when requesting large numbers of documents. These combined improvements will make derived source more flexible and performant across a broader range of scenarios.
```
